Comar, were charitable trust.
Do we have, um,
Tim, Tim, do we have them coming in?
Okay. Um, do we have Ruth Chapman
available, or who is that?
The, or Mary Bowden if community law
do we community law centers.
Uh, if we start with them,
we have the community law.
Great. Thank you. Um,
KDA Kilda.
Hi, um, Rupert, we can see your, your name come up.
Here we go. Thank you very much. Um, we have 10 minutes
with you this morning.
Um, you can use that time as you wish.
If you want to, um, leave any time for, um,
for any questions, go ahead.
Um, yeah, we, I, we've called a bit early,
I think were we on at 1214?
Yeah, we're just, yeah. Oh, we
go technical with other things. Yeah. Okay, cool.
I've got a couple of colleagues who are supposed
to be joining me, uh, as well
to assist with this submission.
So I just, I can see Lars has managed to join.
I just give, I wonder if we could make a few minutes for us
to hopefully have Toby join as well, if that's okay. Sorry,
Just, um, if you can get started, are you able
to get started without them or not? Yep. We,
Um, Lars and I can get started
and hopefully Toby will be able to join in as we go.
Great. All right. Um, so Koto, my name is Rut O'Brien.
I am one of the law reform coordinators
for community law centers, roa.
Um, and I'm joined by my colleague Lar Hanson,
who is an experienced employment, uh,
solicitor from the community law center in Taranaki.
Uh, hopefully we'll be joined by Toby Cooper as well, from
Disability Law, which is our specialist Law Center for
Disabled People and their rights.
Um, community law provides free legal advice to those
who can't afford it and can't
otherwise access legal assistance or representation.
We are often assisting people who are in small employment,
uh, small employers, those who aren't unionized, um,
and people on casual or contractor arrangements.
We are have 24 community law centers across the country,
and we, employment is our biggest regularly either the
biggest or second biggest, uh, area
of law that we advise on.
So we have a lot of experience in this area.
Um, and this submission is from law centers,
which is the peak body for all 24 community law centers.
So the submission was written in, uh, consultation
with all 24 law centers
and represents our, our views as a whole.
Um, I'll pass to Lars to discuss our issues
with the contractor, uh, area in particular,
and then Toby will hopefully be along to discuss the, uh,
our, our issues with the compensation rules, the changes
to section 1, 2, 3 being the primary issues
that we wanted to talk about today.
Um, Kilda la
Thank you Ru, and good afternoon.
Committee members. Um,
my oral submissions focus on the contractor proposal
in three main areas, sham contracts, exploitation
of vulnerable and uncertainty and litigation.
In regards to 0.1, the sham contracts,
the proposal promotes form over
substance in the contractual relationship
and creates a gateway attest that is controlled
by one party, the offerer.
As long as the written form complies, there is no ability
to challenge the contract's employment.
This proposal removes the current safeguards against abuse
of form, which is well highlighted by the employment court
when they look under Section six.
Looking at the real nature of the employment relationship
or the relationship in regard to 0.2 exploitation.
There are some people that do not
and will not have the business acumen to be contractors.
This may present in various aspects
of the person's vulnerability.
Financial, economic, age, financial circumstances, uh,
sorry, family circumstances or intellectual ability.
These are the people that we see,
and we have seen examples of the use
of the contractor agreement when they're truly employees.
The sole purpose of contractor agreements
for these individuals was
and is to remove their basic employment rights.
This proposed change would place these people at a clear
disadvantage, especially when the power is held
by the offerer of the working relationship.
This is the inherent power imbalance
recognized under section three
of the Employment Relations Act.
Simply put, vulnerable
and desperate people will accept whatever they can get
in regards to uncertainty and litigation.
The proposal has a high potential
of shifting litigation from the employment regime
to the civil regime,
and also potentially increasing the amount of litigation.
The main points there would be contractual
undue influence contracts for minors.
Uh, just as a passing comment, we see contracts for children
coming through our offices, unconscionable bargaining
and just unconscionable contracts in its whole.
Now, um, that was the substance of my oral submissions,
and we were going to move to Toby from this point.
Um, I see he's not in yet.
Rupert, is there anything you'd like to add?
Yeah, Klar, I'll, um, quickly just cover our concerns
regarding the changes to, uh, section 1, 2, 3,
and 1, 2, 4 being those, uh, relating to contribution.
Um, we have really serious concerns with these changes.
They look to alter the current employment system
by HU in a huge way.
Uh, it's not really reflected in the explanatory note
or the, um, intent of this bill.
The level to which these changes might change
the employment landscape.
Um, in particular, we have serious concerns about the
removal of contribution, uh, like the removal
of compensation, whether there has been any employee
contribution to the, uh, personal grievance arising.
What we see is that there is almost always
some relationship breakdown.
It often starts from the employer's side,
but the employee may react before they get advice,
and they may be considered
to have contributed in some small way.
But what this change proposes to do is completely remove
all compensation for any, uh, contribution, uh,
and with any, without any kind of level of proportionality.
So where you have an employee
or who has treated an employee very poorly,
the employee may lose complete rights to any compensation
with being the primary reason, uh, primary thing
that we apply for, to account for, uh, breaches
of good faith and of natural justice for an employee.
They remove all ability to get that.
If they have some sort of error on their behavior,
some small level of contribution,
they will lose that, right?
Um, the ERA already has a
well-functioning system to deal with.
Contribution commonly, uh,
employee compensation is reduced
even up to a hundred percent.
It does happen whether the contribution is serious,
it's already well dealt with by the ERA,
and their flexibility should remain.
We also have a real serious problem with the serious
misconduct, uh, issue, uh, contribution,
where the employer is given free reign to completely breach,
um, natural justice, where they believe
that the employee has what has committed,
what they believe is serious misconduct.
Um, serious misconduct isn't defined in law.
It can be defined in the contract as well.
And the proposed change is that
where an employee has committed serious misconduct,
all their rights are out the window.
The employer may procedurally follow, no,
you may follow no legitimate procedure.
They may dismiss the employee without telling them why.
They may not give them any right to respond.
Uh, they could embarrass them or,
or yell at them in front of their colleagues, uh,
and the employee would have absolutely no ability
to get any kind of comeback for that kind of issue.
And so the employer, and even the employer could bring up a
serious misconduct issue months or even years
after it's happened.
And the way that this law is written currently is
that even at that point, the employee would have no rights.
Um, I'll leave rooms for some questions now, hopefully.
Oh, Toby, did you want to add anything? I see you've joined.
Hi, Rupert. Uh, no, I think you,
you've said it mostly quite well.
I did. Um, I'm not sure if you had said, um,
but look, as an alternative suggestion,
if the government seeks to restrict access to remedies,
this should cut both ways.
So, if the government is genuinely committed
to both a balance in judicial outcomes
and setting barriers on access to remedies,
this should be imposed on both employers
and employees alike.
So, claims by employers such as restraint of trade claims
or breach of confidentiality claims should also be
subject to the same barriers.
So this would not be our preferred approach
as it would not address our concerns about the failure
to deliver proportional remedies.
However, it would maintain a greater degree
of balance in the system than the current proposals alone.
I think apart from that group, that you've, uh,
summed up our position quite well.
Thanks.
Wonderful. Thank you so much for your, um, submission.
We don't have any questions at this stage,
so appreciate you taking the time to, um,
to present to us today.
Sure. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, it looks as though we have Ruth Chapman,
um, coming on.
I'm sorry that I'm looking like a sword. Oh,
Well, yeah.
Oh, I turned my video on. That might help. Well,
That, that'll help. Otherwise,
we're expecting some
sharp comments from you, Ruth.
Um, so, um, you've got, uh, five minutes with us, um,
and you can use that time to include questions if you wish.
Thank you. Uh, so I've just been listening
to the community law one,
and I agree with, um, the comments
that they have made.
I think that at base, the bill
talks about re tilting with an intention to, um, move,
um, more protections to employers on the assumption
that they don't have enough.
Uh, I think that the bill actually goes the other way,
that it, it tilts, um, protections under the act,
uh, further away from employees and,
and in fact find much of the language.
Quite ironic, really, um, in that sense,
I did say in the introduction, uh, to my brief submission
that I used to work in a role where people would often come
to see me because they'd suddenly discovered at work that
somebody was criticizing their work.
And, um, and many of them didn't know what to do next,
and particularly if they did not belong to, um, a union.
So, uh, the, the issues
around the, um, inability to take personal grievances
for employees on higher wages, uh,
those people would alre already under the old law feel
really, um, isolated.
And I did recall while I was writing this, that, um,
so we need to go back something like 30 years probably, uh,
to the time when, uh, people on individual contracts,
this was under the ECA, uh, were not a, were not able
to take grievances.
My my sister who was in a job,
which these days I'm sure would be over the $180,000, was,
I understand the first person in New Zealand
to take a personal grievance against her employer
for wrongful dismissal.
Uh, and she won.
Um, so I'm really
puzzled about this.
I just, the ability to give an employer the right
to dismiss somebody for, um, no,
and to not be required to say why
and not give the employer the chance to challenge.
It just seems a complete abuse
of natural justice, um, to me.
And so I, well, words fail me,
as I said, every time I, every time I go back
and look at the bill, as I was preparing for this,
I just found myself, um, boiling really
with rage ab about that to, to
often in, in all levels of employment,
particularly in senior levels.
Um, as in my sister's case, uh, the,
her immediate boss took a dislike to her,
and that was enough for him to make it possible
for her to have to leave.
Um, I also wanna pick up on one of the community law things,
which was that when things go wrong, it's really easy
for people to do things which are not
by the book not desirable.
What this bill does is it says that it's okay
for employers to do that.
So in other words, um, in remedies
around personal grievances,
if they've done some small things wrong,
that shouldn't be taken into account.
But if employees have done some things wrong,
that should be taken into account
and prevent them from getting the remedies that they are,
are seeking fear, um,
isolation, uh, feelings of being bullied, all sorts
of things, whether right or wrong, often lead to, uh,
some issues, um, like that.
Um, I won't talk about the, um, serious misconduct
'cause I think other people have covered with that.
I'll just conclude by saying I believe that in a number
of ways around the removal of the 30 day rule, uh, all
of the aspects that what this bill does is increase the
precariousness of employment for, uh,
employees in New Zealand.
Uh, and it, it is already
a difficult thing for people,
but to put n near so many more people at risk
in their employment, I think is unconscionable.
Great. Um, we've actually met time, so thank you very much
for your submission today, Ruth,
really appreciate you coming and presenting to us.
Thank you. Cheers.
Um, and next we have Mary Bowden.
Um, it looks like we've got Mary on, um, on the phone.
Um, Mary, so can you hear us, Mary, able to speak?
Hopefully Mary is able to speak.
Can you unmute yourself, Mary,
and if possible, if you've got camera access on your
phone, that'd be great too.
Okay. So, um, doesn't look like we are getting Mary through,
so if we could, uh, Mary, are you there?
Yes. Can you hear me?
Yes, we can. Alright, Mary, thank you for your time today.
Um, we have, um, five minutes with you if you want to start,
that's great, including time for questions.
Okay. Well, well, thank you for the opportunity.
Um, this is my personal submission
and I'm taking a, a, um,
I appreciate the previous speakers have really gotten into
the weeds, and I'm taking a bit more of a, a wider view.
Um, and for, for context, I mean, I thought in all of this,
um, you know, those who've gone
before us, having fought two world wars
and suffered through deprivation, sought a better life
for them and their dependence.
And this lead to New Zealand adopting an
egalitarian way of life.
And we have to ensure that legacy
and continues down the generations.
Part of that legacy is that New Zealand is a safe, secure,
civil, relatively sane society.
So especially for overseas businesses, it is, in my opinion,
a privilege to operate here.
It's not a right and,
and there's a price to pay for operating here.
You pay taxes like GST
income tax, tax on profits.
You don't offshore your profits.
You do it on our terms and conditions.
You respect and abide by our laws, you respect our people
and the dignity of our people.
Otherwise, such a business is expecting New Zealand
and New Zealanders to subsidize their activity.
And we got rid of subsidies in the eighties.
And I speak here of subsidies in the wider term, not just
in terms of the direct dollar cost,
but in terms of those other things
that previous speakers such Ruth as Ruth Chapman talked to,
where you change the terms
and conditions so that the,
the level playing field is tilted in,
in one party's favor.
So business is free to operate within their terms
and conditions, and if not, they're free to choose to adapt
their business model to their terms and conditions,
or if they choose not to, they're free to go elsewhere.
If the New Zealand, uh, uh,
and I'm speaking here regarding taxis.
If New Zealand a New Zealand owned taxi business does not
operate by the current terms
and conditions paying its employees correctly,
it will be alphas and it may fail
and it's in direct sanctioned.
This is how bad actors are restrained in a market economy.
We don't subsidize bad actors
or people trying to bypass the terms and conditions.
So in that respect, overseas business is subject to the same
market forces as local business.
They are not immune the level we want
a level field playing field, not a tilted one.
Now, our business environment, we have minimum wage,
and the minimum wage in New Zealand was praised
by none other than Mark Twain when he was here.
We have health and safety laws, which, which
structure work breaks and will rest breaks
to protect workers and customers,
but employees as independent contractors, as per
my understanding of the Uber business model,
allows a platform taxi service
to apparently bypass our rules which protect our
citizens, visitors and workers.
Our employment authority ruled the Uber drivers were not
able to generate goodwill value
to their business via the app.
As a result, there would be no owner's equity from a loyal
customer base, which could be onsold
to another business owner.
Say, if someone wants to retire, the Uber model appears
to prevent this and controls which driver gets which
customer for whatever fear.
And the driver appears to me
to be largely kept into the dark at the beginning
of the fair, whether it's a five or a 10 or a $50
or a hundred dollars fee.
Thank you, Mary. Um, we have time with you. So,
And I just to conclude with a, with what a,
a Queenstown taxi driver said to me, I asked him
what he thought of Uber and he said Uber is, is a charity
and that driver donate their time to it.
And I'll leave you thanks. And I thank you for your time.
Thank you, Mary. Appreciate it.
Um, and uh, so next up we have Uber,
uh, we've got Pierre Brenner
and, um, Cameron Lachlan from, um, Uber.
Uh, thank you very much.
Um, we have 10 minutes with you, uh, to use as you wish
with time for questions if you so desire.
Thank you Chair, uh, Koto, our members
of the Select committee.
Uh, my name is Cameron Lachlan
and I'm here with my colleague, uh, Pierre Bruner on behalf
of Uber to discuss our submission.
We appreciate this opportunity to speak
with the Select committee about
this critically important bill.
Since launching over a decade ago,
Uber has become an integral part of daily life
for nearly one in two Kiwis, connecting them
to work friends Hanau and their favorite local businesses.
Last year alone, Uber
and Uber Eats generated 1.5 billion direct
and indirect economic value for communities across our tier,
as well as opportunities for tens of thousands of people
to earn and work flexibly in a way that fits
around sporting family health commitments or other work.
In our submission, we have shared feedback on some
of our drivers and delivery people.
They're just a few of the more than 40,000 Kiwis
who choose to earn with us.
91% of our earners say
that they wouldn't continue if this
flexibility were removed.
The Bill's intent to clarify contractor status is a crucial
step towards providing certainty for these individuals
and the businesses that engage them.
While we strongly support the intent of the bill,
we believe three vital amendments are necessary
to ensure the Bill's intent is met.
First, the proposed gateway test needs to cover businesses
that operate on a facilitation model,
not just a direct engagement model.
This is critical for businesses like Uber
where drivers perform work facilitated by our technology.
The facilitation model is recognized in the Land Transport
Act and under the act,
small passenger service operators include facilitators which
are defined as businesses
that connect drivers and passengers.
By electronic means.
Uber is such a facilitator, we propose clarification
to the bill because it's currently drafted.
Facilitation businesses, including ours, will be left out.
Second, we urge the committee to support the application
of the contractor criteria to existing contracts
with an appropriate savings provision for disputes filed
before the bills introduction into parliament.
Without it, businesses will be vulnerable
to reclassification ca claims going back six years,
applying the current uncertain law
and creating an uneven playing field
for new entrants to the market.
The government has the ability
to make any law apply retrospectively where it's required
to provide clarification or certainty.
This is one of the rare situations envisaged
by the legislation design
and Advisory Committee guidelines
where backwards looking legal clarification is appropriate.
This will ensure the bill delivers on the government's
objective of providing certainty
and prevent extensive resource intensive litigation
that could burden both businesses and the legal system.
Finally, to simplify assessment
and reduce further disputes, we propose an amendment
to clarify that if a contract provides a worker
with the substantive right set out in the gateway
test, the test is met.
These aren't just technical suggestions.
Uh, they're crucial to safeguarding the flexible earning
opportunities that many, uh, thousands
of New Zealanders rely on every day.
We are committed to working constructively
with this committee to ensure the bill
achieves its intended outcome.
Uh, thank you and we welcome. Any questions?
Um, I don't see any questions. Oh, sorry. Oui. Go ahead.
Um, thank you Madam Chair. Not so much a question.
Um, I I, I guess just a reaction from my side in terms
of the argument for retrospective.
My sense is that certainty requires certainty
of the law in a, in a forward going way.
Um, and I'm just, I'm not convinced
that the arguments are made to impose retrospective
legislation at all.
Um, I think it's, it's there in terms
of the argument is really one, in terms of litigation costs
as opposed to certainty of the forward going law.
Um, I'm just wondering if you have a, a reaction to that.
Yeah, it's a legitimate question.
Uh, where should the certainty start?
And we heard deliver easy, uh,
speak in the other committee this morning, uh,
about their concern where one of their workers, uh,
might bring a claim and had they been engaged
for 12 months prior to the introduction
of the bill in 12 months subsequent they would have two
different legal statuses, which in itself shows
that the complexity that we're dealing with here, uh,
to achieve, uh, true certainty
and consistency, uh, Uber's view as the test should apply
to any claim moving forward.
Uh, but we accept that any claim that, uh,
is filed at the date of the bill, uh,
could be assessed using the existing law.
Um, if, if that's not the position, uh, there's,
there's sort of a six year lookback, uh, period
and it's clear, uh, to Uber and of,
and from some of the other submissions
that we've seen from taxi companies
and postal services companies, uh, that,
that businesses could be looking, um, at, at existing, uh,
liability because they've relied on the
arrangements for the last six years.
Okay. Well,
I don't think we have any further questions for you.
Um, appreciate you taking your time to, um, spend
with the committee this, um, this afternoon.
Um, thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Um, next we have RCSA.
Um, and so we have, um, 10 minutes
with you and, um, welcome Brooke.
Um, thank you for your time.
So you can use that 10 minutes as you wish with time
for questions if you want.
Tremendous Kiara, everybody,
and thank you so much for the opportunity to,
um, speak with you today.
We, um, at RCSA are the peak industry body
for the recruitment and staffing sector, um, in,
in New Zealand and in Australia.
And, um, that would be labor hire,
it would be permanent placement recruitment, um,
and all of our members across both countries, um,
engage independent contractors, um, oftentimes
and supply them to clients.
One of the challenges we are gonna come at this bill
with is, um, a slightly different
and bespoke concern around the gateway contact,
the contact a gateway test.
We respect the test
and we think it's fantastic that the government we welcome
moves to try and clarify
and give certainty to employers around setting a test.
The concern that we have with it is that it,
it has had a quite a narrow focus on a particular segment
of the contracting marketplace
and perhaps hasn't looked to some
of the unintended consequences that can flow, um,
to other forms of contracting in the marketplace
from its introduction.
So, um, RCSA
and its members are strongly aligned with government, um,
government's intent here around allowing workers
to choose contracting if they so wish.
And we do know from work here in Australia
and New Zealand that the vast bulk of people
who are working, um, for platform-based work
and food delivery, often choosing
that way to, to work that way.
They want to be contractors, they want
to run multiple platforms at once.
They wanna come in
and out of work at 20 minute slots when it works for them.
And we are, um, aligned in the capacity of, um, governments
to allow 'em to choose that work should they wish it.
But we also have seen, um, exploitation in markets where,
um, genuinely vulnerable workers, um, are exposed to, um,
challenges where employers
who are not operating correctly can contract themselves out
of, um, employment arrangements and underpaid workers.
And I do think, um, it's a really, um, fine line,
the government's walking when we start looking at
introducing gateway tests whilst also trying to give choice
and also manage, um, exploitation.
When we do it through the lens of just platform work.
I think the challenge is we sometimes don't contemplate
where, where, where the flow on effect
might, might, might live.
Now, um, for our members, the vast bulk
of contracting work tends
to happen at the higher income levels.
Um, they will be, um, policy specialists,
they will be IT specialists
for project work they might be working for.
Um, they'll be engaged by a staffing firm.
They'll be placed in a public service, um, role
or, um, in a large corporate role to run a, you know,
IT project, what have you.
Often they're quite high income earners, but they're lives
and their structures, their financial structures are set
around contracting 'cause would much rather contract
and take their skills and move them around the marketplace.
The challenge that we see with the gateway test is
that the requirement that to be a contractor under
that test, you have to either be able
to nominate your own hours
or outsource your work, um, is very challenging for
that type of contracting arrangement.
Now, we do appreciate that the government's intent wasn't
to make a change to the existing scenario for those types
of contractors, but what we've seen historically is
that once you make a test, you know, in New Zealand law
as in Australian law for a long time,
engaging contractors is a little bit gray.
And often any determination around an employee or a,
or a contractor or the classification
of worker is gonna come down to a legal test.
And quite often, um, these, uh, contractors assigned, uh,
agreements up front that they prefer to be a contractor.
Um, and there hasn't been real a precedent there
that given clarity for employers.
So it's still a bit of a legal gray area, if you will.
Um, the introduction of a gateway test in that scenario is
that it makes that gray space a little
bit more black and white.
And we've seen historically
that if there is a court proceeding
where someone may challenge their engagement
as a contractor versus, um, employment arrangement, um,
the access to a gateway test that, that,
that contractor may not meet means that they're more likely
to be determined as an employer could get reclassified
as an employee even though that person had chosen
to come in as a contractor.
Our concern, the reason we have this concern as,
I guess I've seen it play out in Australia,
and we've seen it around the world where a lot
of the focus on the test for
what is a contractor is very much focused on the emerging
contractor around platform based work and things like that.
But the implementation of it has massive flow on effects
for, um, how people can choose to live
and work in contracting arrangements in other
sectors in Australia.
Um, the government moved a couple of years ago to, um,
redefine, you know, what an employee was, if you like.
And so in doing so, they've essentially classified a lot
of those contractor based roles as employees
by the nature of what they do.
They go in regularly. They might have, you know,
a year working on a project.
They work nine to five alongside, um, you know, colleagues
who are doing similar work with scheduled hours.
And in redefining it, um, the argument that's been put is
that, you know, well these contractors, if they want
to still be contractors, by all
means they can be contractors.
No one's stopping them from being contractors,
but it just means there'll be a tested law down the track.
The problem that we found in Australia is
that the risk associated with engaging somebody
as a contractor, um,
under this new definition is significant
because to the point made by the, um,
the evidence earlier is
that there's a huge financial liability you are carrying if
down the track, you know, in five years time,
six years time, um, a contracting arrangement
that was agreed when there was a good relationship with
that person and they wanted it,
things can change in five years time.
If they then go back
and question, um, their engagement as a contractor and,
and wanna put the case
that they have been always an employee.
Um, the liability for that business then is actually back
that five to six years.
They've gotta basically cover, you know, kiwi savers, um,
annual leave and a whole raft of things
that they hadn't considered, right.
So in Australia, the way it's worked has been
that businesses, when it much riskier to engage someone in
that path, in that way, um, they've moved
to put them into employment models,
but along casual employment rather than contracting.
And what we've seen in Australia is a real frustration from
people who want to be contractors
who are earning a hundred thousand dollars a year,
but no one will take them on as a contractor
because the risk is just too big.
So I think it's, I'm just here today, um,
at the very high level to just say, look, think outside of
the funnel that has been the focal point of this legislation
and whether or not you've seen our submission,
we've posed a few different ways that we might be able
to cut it, whether it's a more enhanced, um,
contractor declaration form, whether it's going to be a way
of including
or expanding out the test for what a contractor is, um,
around, um, adding a control mechanism so you're not just
sourcing, outsourcing the work or control over your hours,
but you might be able to say you have a level
of influence over signing on and agreeing hours in advance.
Um, there's multiple ways to do it
and we don't want to get involved in all the other myriad
of issues that you are facing with this piece,
but we just wanted to make sure that irrespective of
what comes out, that the, the, the, the test itself
and the legislation itself is very clear that, um,
it's not intending to, um, it's not intending to render,
um, by omission other forms of contracting as employment,
which our big concern is essentially that might happen
through the courts down the track. Great,
Thank you very much for that.
Um, we have a question from Camilla Blich.
Hi Kra. Thanks for your submission.
I just had a question around the contracting
points that you were making.
Mm-hmm. Are you at all, um, concerned that some
of these changes, uh, might lead to situations where people
are not contractors being, um, classified
as contractors, as we, as the government intends
to move away from the true nature of employment test,
Um, the contractors might be
classified as not contractors?
Yes, I do think so. And so our concern is that the other
Way around, sorry, that, um,
that employees will be class classified as contractors.
Oh, I guess there are scenarios yes,
where I guess that could happen.
It's, it's unusual and I think this comes down
to the question that was asked earlier that I,
and I flagged earlier around,
or the point I raised earlier about, um,
protecting genuinely vulnerable workers.
I do think that the challenge we face is when you are
looking at, and you'll see from our submission,
we've actually put in place a recommendation,
maybe even thinking about a threshold
where the contractor test the gateway test applies
beneath a particular threshold.
Because I do think, um,
when you're looking at vulnerable workers,
genuinely vulnerable workers, it's unusual for them
to be able to contract out, subcontract out their work,
people who wanted to be employees,
but are forced into contracting arrangements,
really have that control.
So I do think it strikes them up,
but that vulnerable component of the sector,
and I don't think it's effective in trying to, um,
create protections for people
who have inadvertently found themselves forced into a
contracting arrangement they thought was employment.
It's one of the reasons. So no, I don't think it's going
to capture those people who wanted to be employed
and are contract is because they really have the capacity
to outsource their work or have that level of control.
But I do think, um, that's one
of the reasons we suggested maybe a very strongly beefed up,
um, contractor declaration test.
I think one of the challenges our members have seen in the
marketplace in New Zealand is that, um,
and we see this across, um, construction sometimes
where our members get very frustrated about creating a level
playing field and seeing some, you know, um,
rogue operators in market who will, um,
use language barriers and other forms of disadvantage to try
and contract their way out of minimum entitlement, you know,
and employment entitlement.
And that frustrates us for two reasons.
One, it gives the reputa, you know,
the industry a really bad name,
and we have a lot of very professional, obviously,
peak body people who, um,
our members are professional operators
and proud of what they do.
Um, the other reason is
because it skews the playing field, right?
People are undercutting in market based on not leading
what would be minimum employment entitlement.
So, um, we have a shared interest in stamping that out.
And I think what they shared with me was that a,
a beefed up contractor, a contractors
of declaration form might help if it leads with
be aware if you are choosing,
because all we're about is making sure people who want
to be contractors can be, right.
And we've seen inadvertently in Australia that option's gone
for them now that it, it's out of the, it's not even offered
to them because of the risk associated.
And so if we can beef it up so that people are clear on
what they are giving up, right, what they're giving up
as their entitlements is the first piece,
and then clear upon what their, um, obligations are gonna be
once they sign that piece of paper, we think
that's a better deterrent. Great.
Thank you. Um, I'll have to cut you off there.
Sorry, Brooke. Thank you for your time. Appreciate it.
Um, it was very insightful.
Thank you all. Appreciate it.
Okay, team, who have we got next?
Have we got the Freightways group at all?
Uh, from the, it
looks like we have, um, Megan Gunderson
for, um, is that Fair Pay legal?
Hello, good afternoon. Um, welcome to the committee.
We have, um, 10 minutes with you.
Um, you can use that time as you wish, um,
to include some question time.
Um, go ahead. You're
on mute, please unmute yourself.
You hear me? Yes. Thank you.
Megan Gunderson here.
I'm a lawyer with my own company, fair Play Legal,
and I, uh, uh, specialize in employment work.
I act, uh, probably two thirds
of the time for employers
and, uh, the balance for employees.
I also, uh, represent
three onsite staff associations.
So I think I've got a, a pretty good feel for the, uh,
employment environment
and have been doing it for a long time.
Uh, so, um, I guess the thing
that I'm mostly concerned about really is the independent
contractor, uh, change proposal
and, um, the revocation of the 30 day rule.
So, um, I'm just going to focus on, on on those two aspects.
And I guess what I invite you to consider is that
what the mps, what you're dealing with
and you know, your recommendations, um, to cabinet.
Uh, you've got, you've got the potential to make
huge fundamental societal changes with
what you're proposing,
but with both, um, the independent, um,
contractor issue
and the 30 day revocation role, you know,
I think two
or three speakers ago, um, the person said, um,
you know, how New Zealand's seen in the world, um, the,
the leading, um, moves that we made to protect workers,
um, you know, half a century ago.
Uh, you know, we can be proud of that.
We have a society where people
can largely be employed
and know what their income is going to be,
and they know that they're going to have some holidays
and some sick leave and some bereavement leave.
You know, I can tell you that, um,
in the world of employment that I deal with,
which is mainly small and medium employers,
but I do act for, um, had a lot of involvement with local,
local government and some large employers,
but mostly I'm in the small to medium employer range.
And, you know, if
people can't, if we're moving the
spec, you know, the scale towards the more the gig economy,
which of course has already been happening, it,
it really does make employees more
and more vulnerable.
And it's difficult for them, for instance, to get a mortgage
because you have to be able to demonstrate,
you know, the reliability of income.
And with this proposed legislation,
of course, you are dealing with, um, the lower end
spectrum employee, you know, general laborers, um,
cleaners, taxi drivers, data entry clerks.
And you're also, like the previous speaker said,
you're dealing with, you know, software designers
and engineers and project managers and high earners.
But I think it's really important for you to understand that
the legislation is not distinguishing between those levels,
that whole spectrum of our society in New Zealand.
And therefore you need to be sure in
whatever decision you make, that you are, I think,
protecting the v more vulnerable worker.
And just remember, it's, it is those laborers taxi drivers,
you know, people on $23, 50 an hour, um,
you know, at 40 hours a week that make, that generates
gross $48,800 a week.
So we are not talking, um, you know, that it's,
it's a not a lot of money. And, uh,
Um, thank you very much, Megan.
We've met time with you this morning, um, this afternoon.
Appreciate you, um, taking the time to present to us.
I thought I had 10 minutes.
Uh, I beg your pardon? You do. I'm sorry I cut you off.
Sorry. You could keep going. Sorry.
Thank the question coming up if you've got any.
Right. And, um, the other aspect is that tax collection,
um, you know, can become more difficult when, um,
you're relying on, um, the print, you know, it's easy
to collect tax when PA person's an employee, um,
because the employer then also need just needs to, you know,
get that PAYE at the point that they,
um, pay their employee.
So that's just another practical aspect to consider.
So, um, um,
and I don't agree to, um, uh, the idea
of backdating the impact of this legislation.
Um, I think we, we, um, must, um, we take that risk
as an employer, um, to, uh, uh, try
and create the best agreements we can and go forward.
Um, you know, uh,
this legislation should apply from the time it comes, uh,
is whatever is passed.
Um, and the second issue is, 'cause I see it
'cause I work across, um, a whole bunch of, um,
businesses, um, in our society
and those businesses with, uh, union
or staff association presence,
they do have better terms and conditions.
And if you're considering to revoke the 30 day rule,
which is that if there's an employee who's going to be, um,
taken on as an employee by an organization that has, uh,
coverage of that role by a collective agreement, then um,
they, that employee goes on
to the collective agreement terms
and conditions for the first 30 days.
And it just may, you know, I think this is also important
that, um, it, it, it's smooth.
Um, the person goes onto those terms
and they can make an active decision
after in that first 30 days.
Um, whether they want to continue with the, with the, um,
staff association or union, um, or not.
And, um, you know, it's so difficult to get a job these days
and to throw for an employee then to make a decision.
Um, you know, I, I want to go on the collective agreement,
like at the outset, they will feel vulnerable doing that.
And um, I can tell you that having looked across workplaces,
you know, we need to keep offering basic protections
to people, which they unions really help to keep
that in workplaces.
And I, I see the, the great workplaces that have, um,
unions, um, um, actively involved.
So, you know, those are my submissions.
You're making a very important decision here
and I, I, I, um, hope you take some of my decisions on board
and I'm happy to take questions if there are any.
Thank you, Megan. We have a question from Camilla Ledge
You so much Megan, um, for your submission
and for your written comments as well.
And I know you've covered a number of areas,
but I just thought I could ask a question on, um,
the contractor's issue as you were particularly highlighted
that you made the comment in your written submission that
the courts already do a good job
of determining when there's a, when there's an issue
around whether someone's an employee or a contractor.
And I just wondered because of your extensive experience
in employment law, whether you could just, um, maybe, uh,
explain that a little bit for the committee.
'cause I do think there is a bit of a perception that there,
there aren't enough rules around that, whereas, um,
I think you've outlined in your submission that, you know,
there is quite a clear test.
Yeah, there are. And, um, the wonderful, um,
employment New Zealand website, which, um, you know,
as a government website, you know,
sets it out quite clearly, um, what the tests are
that one has to go through.
You know, what is the real nature of the employment?
Does the employee really,
or the proposed worker have the ability to, um, sort of,
are they in business for themselves or not?
You know, uh, uh, what the fundamental tests, you know, uh,
again, that's, that's really also, are they in business
for themselves and the integration tests, you know,
do they have to wear, um, the, the uniforms, um,
do they get inducted?
Um, you know, are they seen as part of the,
um, principal company?
Um, you know, nothing in the law is terribly simple.
And, and just by making a new law, honestly,
there will just be decades then of, of of, of, um,
litigation over that too.
I, I, I think thinking that you're going
to get into a litigation free zone, um, is, is naive.
Um, you know, it's, it's been, you can tell
by the employment courts having already decided
with the Uber case, you know,
that the Uber's lost at every step of the way, you know, so
that just demonstrates how clear, um, the issues are.
It, it, it's great in a way that the Uber case is, um, is,
is has gone through that space and got such great publicity.
So I just think let's just keep it, let the, um,
Supreme Court make its decision.
Who knows what that will be.
But, um, yeah, that will, that will happen
and that will make it much clearer for everybody.
Great. Thank you so much Megan,
and, um, apologies for trying
to cut you off too soon. Cheers. Okay. Thank
You. Thank you.
Right. Uh, next we have Freightways group, we've got, um,
mark, um, and Amy,
is it good afternoon.
We have, uh, 10 minutes with you, um, to use as you wish
with time for questions if you choose.
I
Thanks very much for having us.
Um, so I'm Mark Tro here. I'm the CEO of Freightways.
Been at Freightways for around almost three decades now.
Uh, and with me is Amy.
Hi, I'm Amy Van Gilles.
Um, I'm the head of people and culture here at the group.
Um, but I've actually been in, in freight
and logistics for, uh, around 10 years now. Right?
So what we wanted to talk to, um, in particular was the
issue, issue around the, the, the new test for contractors.
So the new test, uh, that's been proposed
as a gateway test for contractors.
Just a little bit of background.
So Freightways has around 6,000 people.
Uh, 4,000 of those are employees,
wa waged employees working at a whole range
of jobs from driving vans
and trucks, sorting freight, customer service,
sales, et cetera.
We have around 2000 contractors.
Uh, the vast majority, well the majority
of those in New Zealand, um,
but also many hundreds over in Australia.
So we operate both models and,
and I think the beauty of our business, um,
that's been a place since 1964,
so it's not a Johnny Come lately type model.
It's, it's been pretty well entrenched in our business,
but also in the majority of the transport sector over here
in New Zealand for quite some time.
And I think the, the beauty is people have a choice, uh,
between coming becoming employees or becoming contractors.
There's a range of different roles,
but you could drive a van for TIMG, you could drive a truck
for Big Chill or you could be a contractor
for New Zealand couriers or posthaste.
And, uh, time
and time again, we see that the demand
for contractors exceeds that for employees.
Uh, and the tenure generally
for contractors is far greater than for employees.
So we know it's a model that can work if you get the model
right, and, uh,
and I believe we have, we're in favor of gateway test.
Uh, I think our key points would be though
that we feel this test is just a little too uberized.
Uh, it probably reflects, I think, a, a gig
or an Uber type environment a little more than just some
of those traditional contracting environments.
So we just wanted to talk to a few of those points.
Our submission covers that off
and more than happy to, um,
as I have been involved in talking about this
with governments, I think since maybe David Parker has
billed back in 2017 on the minimum wage contractor amendment
bill that was put through, um, I've been involved in a lot
of these working groups for a very long time.
It'd be nice to, to finally get some clarity and,
and deal with some of the gray that's out there.
The, the four limbs of the key things that we wanted
to talk about, the first one's pretty quick, uh,
written agreement that specifies a contractor
relationship is, is a no brainer.
We've done that forever. We argue
that it should be in simple, plain English.
We also argue that contractors should have the opportunity
to go and get independent advice on that from a lawyer
and accountant, uh, so that everyone understands
what it is that they're getting into.
So we, we have no issue with that.
We actually think that is really should be the primary test
as to whether you're a contractor or not.
The the next three, we just
think have a little bit of nuance.
We just think there's a little bit of definition in here
where I think, you know, it's fairly clear, um,
if you're a gig worker or an Uber driver,
how this could play for you,
but a more traditional contracting environment,
if you're a courier driver, perhaps if you're a hairdresser,
maybe you're an IT contractor, a builder, et cetera.
Um, we think there's a little bit of gray in here.
So the first one is around freedom to work for others.
In the model that we adopt, what we work to do is
to make sure every freightways contractor gets a,
a sustainable level of income out of their runs.
And the average income
for a Freightways courier contract is $507 a day.
At the moment. What we do is we gear those payments
around a daily rate.
And so while we have no issue in principle
for a contractor working for others, it has to be outside
of the day in which they've contracted to us.
And so typically for us, that'll be Monday to Friday.
Uh, some contractors, it might be a Saturday morning.
Many of our contractors will do HelloFresh on a Sunday
or do my fur bag deliveries
for other principles on a weekend.
And there's no issue with that.
I think the, the challenge for us is that it's,
it's completely impractical
that you might do some deliveries, for example,
for New Zealand couriers between nine and 10,
and then you'll switch and do them for RX between 10 and 11.
Uh, that part's problematic.
So it's just a definitional thing.
If the definition means, um, during the period
that you contracted New Zealand couriers Monday to Friday,
then you have freedom to work outside of,
of those days for someone else.
Not a problem, but we think that's
where there's a little bit of confusion.
The the second one is around the control of work time
and subcontracting, uh, limb C
and there's two parts to that.
The first one is either being required to work set times,
or be able to freely subcontract.
Now the set times piece, again, within reason,
I won't spend too much time on that
because I think the second one is,
is probably the more apt one for us.
Reality is our customers are generally open from eight in
the morning till five at night.
And so we need to operate within those times.
Uh, it's not practical that a contractor might elect to work
after 5:00 PM Customers simply won't be open, uh,
or to start at 10 in the morning when a customer is
typically expecting parcels coming in
from eight in the morning as well.
So that timing is typically set by the hours
of the customers that the contractor serves.
So then we come to the second part, be able
to freely subcontract and our, our drivers do that.
Now. Our drivers, um, will frequently
and often subcontract out the run on
given days, weeks, months.
Uh, if they're going overseas for a holiday,
they can subcontract out that run for a month.
If they want to have every Friday off,
they can subcontract out the run every Friday.
There's, there's a real high degree of flexibility there.
But we do vet the relief driver.
We do vet that substitute driver,
and we do that for a range of reasons.
Um, there's health and safety reasons,
there are driver our reasons,
but making sure the person is competent
and capable of doing the job.
So we will check for driver's licenses.
Uh, but likewise, our customers won't want someone
with a recent criminal history for theft coming into their
business premises to pick up T
and iPhones that are being delivered out to customers.
So there are some things that we will vet for
that we don't think it's unreasonable that we're allowed
to continue vetting for the the fourth one,
uh, limb D declining additional work without
termination risk.
Again, I think it's a definitional thing.
So typically if, if Amy is a contractor for us
and she's doing the Wellington, CBD, she might be,
she'll be serving a group of customers, um,
between the hours of eight in the morning
and five in the afternoon.
If there is an additional customer within that area, uh,
in our model, she would collect from that customer
and she'll be remunerated for that.
We wouldn't consider that
to be asking her to do additional work.
It's part of the work specified in the contract,
but from what was in the bill,
we're not a hundred percent clear as to whether
Amy having a right to say, oh no, I won't pick up from
that customer that's in my area meant that you,
you potentially breached that limb.
So again, we can see how that fits with,
with Uber drivers and gig drivers.
I think in our particular model, that becomes problematic.
And I'm not sure it wouldn't be problematic if you're a
contract hairdresser or a builder and,
and similar, so look, we're supportive of a test.
We're supportive of removing some of the gray area.
As I said, I've been in this industry 29
years, nearly 30 years.
Uh, I think in all of
that time there have probably been four
or five contractors out of 11 to 1200
that we have within our group that have talked about status
and, and brought up that issue.
It's typically after they have left.
So these things are always, uh,
after you've left, now you want
to challenge and, and have a crack.
Uh, and, and the gray area we think has,
has got worse and harder.
So we're supportive of something that removes the grace
so people have stability and,
and, um, a bit of certainty both ways.
Our contractors through a lot of the,
the labor government period,
were really nervous about the idea
that they would become employees.
Um, our people earn good money,
they take out mortgages off the back of the consistent
and high level earnings that they're collecting,
and they were really worried that, that, that
potentially could be at risk.
Um, so certainty for both parties actually really important.
More than happy to introduce you to many, many
of our contractors build up really successful businesses,
uh, many cases through 40
and uh, we've got one coming up 50 years very shortly.
Um, it's been a neat model.
Great,
Thank you. Just, um,
on that, um, contractor's issue,
which is obviously the, the main part
of your submission today, um, you talked a lot,
a lot about the gray area that this test would get rid
of in terms of the real nature test.
And in terms of the new gateway test,
what exactly is the gray area that you believe
that this new test will eliminate?
Well, I think what you've seen over years,
so you've seen a number of cases over the years
where the courts had, um, decided that a,
a contract relationship existed.
And then more recently
with probably the parcel express case, which I,
which was pretty unique in a whole range of cases, um,
suddenly determined to be an employee.
And, and look, to be quite honest, to me it seems
that it's almost over to the person sitting in the chair
looking at that test and making some judgment calls
around which way of the, uh, the fence.
That's, it's, as I said, I've, I've looked at this
for nearly 30 years now
and I've seen a number of these cases with our competitors,
New Zealand Post being one of them.
Um, and I think for a period
of time there wasn't too much uncertainty,
but the last 10 years that has changed.
And, you know, some
of those things are reasonably subjective.
We, we argued actually in a number of our submissions back
to 20 17, 20 19, 20 20, that
having a contract should be the determining factor if both
parties have entered into arrangement
where they've signed a contract
and both parties have had the ability to get advice
and understand what they're getting into.
Surely that determines whether it's contractual relationship
or an employment relationship.
And we are both, like, we have far more employees than than
contractors, but we would've said that as the clearest way
of determining both parties have
gone and with their eyes open.
Um, great to determine a test.
Thank you very much and um, for your time, we've met that
with you and appreciate you, um, um,
coming before the committee. Thank
You. Alright, thanks Tonya. Thanks
committee.
Uh, alright members, um, it looks as though, um,
we have come to the end of all of the submitters
with Clark Teams of the Clark.
Is there any, um, anyone we've missed out or anybody else?
No. Great, thank you.
Um, so are we going back into public, I mean, to private
for, um, yeah, we'll go back into private for the,
um, next part of it.
Um, so if you go back to, um, uh,
we should have it on our other agenda item, do we?
Yep.